---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.17.2 <!--0.13-->
    jupytext_version: 6.5.4 <!-- 1.16.4-->
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
  wrap: none
---
(TOC_md_standards_sample_station_camera_location)=
# 7.0 Sample Station/Camera Location

A **sample station** refers to a grouping of two or more non-independent [camera locations](#camera_location), such as when cameras are [clustered](#sampledesign_clustered) or [paired](#sampledesign_paired). For example, multiple cameras in close proximity to one another for individual animal identification or on/off-trail comparison could be considered a [sample station](#sample_station).

Each [sample station](#sample_station) should have its own unique [Sample Station Name](#sample_station_name) (grouping ID). Within a [sample station](#sample_station), each camera will have a unique [Camera Location Name](#camera_location_name) and location (unless multiple cameras are on the same [camera attachment](#camera_attachment) point; e.g., tree).

(TOC_md_standards_sample_station_name)=
## 7.1 Sample Station Name

A sequential alphanumeric identifier for each grouping of two more non-independent [camera locations](#camera_location) (when cameras are deployed in clusters, pairs, or arrays; e.g., "ss1" in "ss1_bh1", "ss1_bh2", "ss1_bh3" etc.). Leave blank if not applicable.

(TOC_md_standards_camera_location_name)=
## 7.2 Camera Location Name

A unique alphanumeric identifier for the location where a single camera was placed (e.g., "bh1", "bh2").

(TOC_md_standards_latitude_camera_location)=
## 7.3 Latitude Camera Location

The latitude of the [camera location](#camera_location) in decimal degrees to five decimal places (e.g., “53.78136”). Leave blank if recording the [Northing Camera Location](#northing_camera_location) instead.

(TOC_md_standards_longitude_camera_location)=
## 7.4 Longitude Camera Location

The longitude of the camera location in decimal degrees to five decimal places (e.g., “-113.46067”). Leave blank if recording the [Easting Camera Location](#easting_camera_location) instead.

(TOC_md_standards_northing_camera_location)=
## 7.5 Northing Camera Location

The northing UTM coordinate of the [camera location](#camera_location) (e.g., “5962006”). Record using the NAD83 datum. Leave blank if recording the [Latitude Camera Location](#latitude_camera_location) instead.

(TOC_md_standards_easting_camera_location)=
## 7.6 Easting Camera Location

The easting UTM coordinate of the [camera location](#camera_location) (e.g., “337875”). Record using the NAD83 datum. Leave blank if recording the [Longitude Camera Location](#longitude_camera_location) instead.

(TOC_md_standards_utm_zone_camera_location)=
## 7.7 UTM Zone Camera Location

The number corresponding to the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) grid zone where the camera was placed (e.g., “12”). UTM is a coordinate system that divides the earth into grid zones that are identified with a number (representing a width of latitude) and letter (representing the hemisphere).

In Alberta the UTM zones are either 11, 12, or TTM. Enter all other UTM zones in the [Camera Location Comments](#camera_location_comments) field (e.g., zones 7-10 for British Columbia), or use [Latitude Camera Location](#latitude_camera_location) and [Longitude Camera Location](#longitude_camera_location) instead of UTM coordinates.

(TOC_md_standards_gps_unit_accuracy)=
## 7.8 GPS Unit Accuracy (m)

The margin of error of the GPS unit used to record spatial information (e.g., "5" [m]), such as the coordinates of the [camera location](#camera_location). On most GPS units (e.g., “Garmin”) this information is provided on the unit's satellite information page. [GPS Unit Accuracy](#gps_unit_accuracy) may vary with the make and model of the GPS unit, surrounding vegetation, infrastructure, atmospheric interference, etc.

(TOC_md_standards_camera_location_comments)=
## 7.9 Camera Location Comments (optional)

Describe any additional details about a [camera location](#camera_location) (e.g., in UTM Zone 7 in British Columbia; aspen-dominated; type of "Off-Highway Vehicle Trail" used as a [FOV Target Feature](#fov_target)).

If you selected "Other" from the [FOV Target Feature](#fov_target) field, provide information about that feature (e.g., 2x4 m high woody debris piles within a cutblock).